Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015



                      0.7             MNIST Logistic Regression                                  0.50    IMDB BoW feature Logistic Regression
                                                              AdaGrad                                                    Adagrad+dropout
                                                              SGDNesterov                                                RMSProp+dropout
                                                              Adam                               0.45
                      0.6                                                                                                SGDNesterov+dropout
                                                                                                                         Adam+dropout
                                                                                                 0.40
                      0.5




                                                                                 training cost
      training cost




                                                                                                 0.35
                      0.4
                                                                                                 0.30

                      0.3
                                                                                                 0.25

                      0.20   5   10      15 20 25 30 35                40   45                   0.200   20   40 60 80 100 120 140 160
                                      iterations over entire dataset                                           iterations over entire dataset


Figure 1: Logistic regression training negative log likelihood on MNIST images and IMDB movie
reviews with 10,000 bag-of-words (BoW) feature vectors.


training to prevent over-fitting. In figure 1, Adagrad outperforms SGD with Nesterov momentum
by a large margin both with and without dropout noise. Adam converges as fast as Adagrad. The
empirical performance of Adam is consistent with our theoretical findings in sections 2 and 4. Sim-
ilar to Adagrad, Adam can take advantage of sparse features and obtain faster convergence rate than
normal SGD with momentum.

6.2                   E XPERIMENT: M ULTI - LAYER N EURAL N ETWORKS

Multi-layer neural network are powerful models with non-convex objective functions. Although
our convergence analysis does not apply to non-convex problems, we empirically found that Adam
often outperforms other methods in such cases. In our experiments, we made model choices that are
consistent with previous publications in the area; a neural network model with two fully connected
hidden layers with 1000 hidden units each and ReLU activation are used for this experiment with
minibatch size of 128.
First, we study different optimizers using the standard deterministic cross-entropy objective func-
tion with L2 weight decay on the parameters to prevent over-fitting. The sum-of-functions (SFO)
method (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2014) is a recently proposed quasi-Newton method that works with
minibatches of data and has shown good performance on optimization of multi-layer neural net-
works. We used their implementation and compared with Adam to train such models. Figure 2
shows that Adam makes faster progress in terms of both the number of iterations and wall-clock
time. Due to the cost of updating curvature information, SFO is 5-10x slower per iteration com-
pared to Adam, and has a memory requirement that is linear in the number minibatches.
Stochastic regularization methods, such as dropout, are an effective way to prevent over-fitting and
often used in practice due to their simplicity. SFO assumes deterministic subfunctions, and indeed
failed to converge on cost functions with stochastic regularization. We compare the effectiveness of
Adam to other stochastic first order methods on multi-layer neural networks trained with dropout
noise. Figure 2 shows our results; Adam shows better convergence than other methods.

6.3                   E XPERIMENT: C ONVOLUTIONAL N EURAL N ETWORKS

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with several layers of convolution, pooling and non-linear
units have shown considerable success in computer vision tasks. Unlike most fully connected neural
nets, weight sharing in CNNs results in vastly different gradients in different layers. A smaller
learning rate for the convolution layers is often used in practice when applying SGD. We show the
effectiveness of Adam in deep CNNs. Our CNN architecture has three alternating stages of 5x5
convolution filters and 3x3 max pooling with stride of 2 that are followed by a fully connected layer
of 1000 rectified linear hidden units (ReLU’s). The input image are pre-processed by whitening, and


                                                                                 6
