Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015




Algorithm 1: Adam, our proposed algorithm for stochastic optimization. See section 2 for details,
and for a slightly more efficient (but less clear) order of computation. gt2 indicates the elementwise
square gt gt . Good default settings for the tested machine learning problems are α = 0.001,
β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999 and  = 10−8 . All operations on vectors are element-wise. With β1t and β2t
we denote β1 and β2 to the power t.
Require: α: Stepsize
Require: β1 , β2 ∈ [0, 1): Exponential decay rates for the moment estimates
Require: f (θ): Stochastic objective function with parameters θ
Require: θ0 : Initial parameter vector
  m0 ← 0 (Initialize 1st moment vector)
  v0 ← 0 (Initialize 2nd moment vector)
  t ← 0 (Initialize timestep)
  while θt not converged do
     t←t+1
     gt ← ∇θ ft (θt−1 ) (Get gradients w.r.t. stochastic objective at timestep t)
     mt ← β1 · mt−1 + (1 − β1 ) · gt (Update biased first moment estimate)
     vt ← β2 · vt−1 + (1 − β2 ) · gt2 (Update biased second raw moment estimate)
     mb t ← mt /(1 − β1t ) (Compute bias-corrected first moment estimate)
     vbt ← vt /(1 − β2t ) (Compute
                              √      bias-corrected second raw moment estimate)
     θt ← θt−1 − α · m  b t /( vbt + ) (Update parameters)
  end while
  return θt (Resulting parameters)


In section 2 we describe the algorithm and the properties of its update rule. Section 3 explains
our initialization bias correction technique, and section 4 provides a theoretical analysis of Adam’s
convergence in online convex programming. Empirically, our method consistently outperforms other
methods for a variety of models and datasets, as shown in section 6. Overall, we show that Adam is
a versatile algorithm that scales to large-scale high-dimensional machine learning problems.

2     A LGORITHM
See algorithm 1 for pseudo-code of our proposed algorithm Adam. Let f (θ) be a noisy objec-
tive function: a stochastic scalar function that is differentiable w.r.t. parameters θ. We are in-
terested in minimizing the expected value of this function, E[f (θ)] w.r.t. its parameters θ. With
f1 (θ), ..., , fT (θ) we denote the realisations of the stochastic function at subsequent timesteps
1, ..., T . The stochasticity might come from the evaluation at random subsamples (minibatches)
of datapoints, or arise from inherent function noise. With gt = ∇θ ft (θ) we denote the gradient, i.e.
the vector of partial derivatives of ft , w.r.t θ evaluated at timestep t.
The algorithm updates exponential moving averages of the gradient (mt ) and the squared gradient
(vt ) where the hyper-parameters β1 , β2 ∈ [0, 1) control the exponential decay rates of these moving
averages. The moving averages themselves are estimates of the 1st moment (the mean) and the
2nd raw moment (the uncentered variance) of the gradient. However, these moving averages are
initialized as (vectors of) 0’s, leading to moment estimates that are biased towards zero, especially
during the initial timesteps, and especially when the decay rates are small (i.e. the βs are close to 1).
The good news is that this initialization bias can be easily counteracted, resulting in bias-corrected
estimates mb t and vbt . See section 3 for more details.
Note that the efficiency of algorithm 1 can, at the expense of clarity, be improved upon by changing
the order p
          of computation, e.g. by replacing the last three lines in the loop with the following lines:
                                                          √
αt = α · 1 − β2t /(1 − β1t ) and θt ← θt−1 − αt · mt /( vt + ˆ).

2.1   A DAM ’ S UPDATE RULE

An important property of Adam’s update rule is its careful choice of √ stepsizes. Assuming  = 0, the
effective step taken in parameter space at √
                                           timestep t is ∆t = α · m
                                                                  b t / vbt . The
                                                                               √ effective stepsize has
two upper bounds: |∆t | ≤ α · (1 − β1 )/ 1 − β2 in the case (1 − β1 ) > 1 − β2 , and |∆t | ≤ α


                                                   2
