Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015




from first-order information. The Sum-of-Functions Optimizer (SFO) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2014)
is a quasi-Newton method based on minibatches, but (unlike Adam) has memory requirements linear
in the number of minibatch partitions of a dataset, which is often infeasible on memory-constrained
systems such as a GPU. Like natural gradient descent (NGD) (Amari, 1998), Adam employs a
preconditioner that adapts to the geometry of the data, since vbt is an approximation to the diagonal
of the Fisher information matrix (Pascanu & Bengio, 2013); however, Adam’s preconditioner (like
AdaGrad’s) is more conservative in its adaption than vanilla NGD by preconditioning with the square
root of the inverse of the diagonal Fisher information matrix approximation.

RMSProp: An optimization method closely related to Adam is RMSProp (Tieleman & Hinton,
2012). A version with momentum has sometimes been used (Graves, 2013). There are a few impor-
tant differences between RMSProp with momentum and Adam: RMSProp with momentum gener-
ates its parameter updates using a momentum on the rescaled gradient, whereas Adam updates are
directly estimated using a running average of first and second moment of the gradient. RMSProp
also lacks a bias-correction term; this matters most in case of a value of β2 close to 1 (required in
case of sparse gradients), since in that case not correcting the bias leads to very large stepsizes and
often divergence, as we also empirically demonstrate in section 6.4.

AdaGrad: An algorithm that works well for sparse gradients qP is AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011). Its
                                                                 t
basic version updates parameters as θt+1 = θt − α · gt /         i=1 gt . Note that if we choose β2 to be
                                                                      2
                                                                   P  t
infinitesimally close to 1 from below, then limβ2 →1 vbt = t−1 · i=1 gt2 . AdaGrad corresponds to a
version of Adam with β1 = 0, infinitesimal (1 − β2 ) and a replacement of α by an      qannealed  version
                                                p                                            Pt
αt = α · t −1/2
                , namely θt − α · t −1/2
                                         ·mb t / limβ2 →1 vbt = θt − α · t −1/2
                                                                                 · gt / t · i=1 gt2 =
                                                                                         −1
             qP
                    t
                    i=1 gt . Note that this direct correspondence between Adam and Adagrad does
θt − α · gt /            2

not hold when removing the bias-correction terms; without bias correction, like in RMSProp, a β2
infinitesimally close to 1 would lead to infinitely large bias, and infinitely large parameter updates.

6     E XPERIMENTS
To empirically evaluate the proposed method, we investigated different popular machine learning
models, including logistic regression, multilayer fully connected neural networks and deep convolu-
tional neural networks. Using large models and datasets, we demonstrate Adam can efficiently solve
practical deep learning problems.
We use the same parameter initialization when comparing different optimization algorithms. The
hyper-parameters, such as learning rate and momentum, are searched over a dense grid and the
results are reported using the best hyper-parameter setting.

6.1   E XPERIMENT: L OGISTIC R EGRESSION

We evaluate our proposed method on L2-regularized multi-class logistic regression using the MNIST
dataset. Logistic regression has a well-studied convex objective, making it suitable for comparison
of different optimizers without worrying √about local minimum issues. The stepsize α in our logistic
regression experiments is adjusted by 1/ t decay, namely αt = √αt that matches with our theorat-
ical prediction from section 4. The logistic regression classifies the class label directly on the 784
dimension image vectors. We compare Adam to accelerated SGD with Nesterov momentum and
Adagrad using minibatch size of 128. According to Figure 1, we found that the Adam yields similar
convergence as SGD with momentum and both converge faster than Adagrad.
As discussed in (Duchi et al., 2011), Adagrad can efficiently deal with sparse features and gradi-
ents
   √ as one of its main theoretical results whereas SGD is low at learning rare features. Adam with
1/ t decay on its stepsize should theoratically match the performance of Adagrad. We examine the
sparse feature problem using IMDB movie review dataset from (Maas et al., 2011). We pre-process
the IMDB movie reviews into bag-of-words (BoW) feature vectors including the first 10,000 most
frequent words. The 10,000 dimension BoW feature vector for each review is highly sparse. As sug-
gested in (Wang & Manning, 2013), 50% dropout noise can be applied to the BoW features during


                                                   5
