                                        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015




                                        A DAM : A M ETHOD FOR S TOCHASTIC O PTIMIZATION
                                                                   Diederik P. Kingma*                           Jimmy Lei Ba∗
                                                              University of Amsterdam, OpenAI                  University of Toronto
                                                                   dpkingma@openai.com                     jimmy@psi.utoronto.ca



                                                                                         A BSTRACT

                                                     We introduce Adam, an algorithm for first-order gradient-based optimization of
arXiv:1412.6980v9 [cs.LG] 30 Jan 2017




                                                     stochastic objective functions, based on adaptive estimates of lower-order mo-
                                                     ments. The method is straightforward to implement, is computationally efficient,
                                                     has little memory requirements, is invariant to diagonal rescaling of the gradients,
                                                     and is well suited for problems that are large in terms of data and/or parameters.
                                                     The method is also appropriate for non-stationary objectives and problems with
                                                     very noisy and/or sparse gradients. The hyper-parameters have intuitive interpre-
                                                     tations and typically require little tuning. Some connections to related algorithms,
                                                     on which Adam was inspired, are discussed. We also analyze the theoretical con-
                                                     vergence properties of the algorithm and provide a regret bound on the conver-
                                                     gence rate that is comparable to the best known results under the online convex
                                                     optimization framework. Empirical results demonstrate that Adam works well in
                                                     practice and compares favorably to other stochastic optimization methods. Finally,
                                                     we discuss AdaMax, a variant of Adam based on the infinity norm.


                                        1       I NTRODUCTION
                                        Stochastic gradient-based optimization is of core practical importance in many fields of science and
                                        engineering. Many problems in these fields can be cast as the optimization of some scalar parameter-
                                        ized objective function requiring maximization or minimization with respect to its parameters. If the
                                        function is differentiable w.r.t. its parameters, gradient descent is a relatively efficient optimization
                                        method, since the computation of first-order partial derivatives w.r.t. all the parameters is of the same
                                        computational complexity as just evaluating the function. Often, objective functions are stochastic.
                                        For example, many objective functions are composed of a sum of subfunctions evaluated at different
                                        subsamples of data; in this case optimization can be made more efficient by taking gradient steps
                                        w.r.t. individual subfunctions, i.e. stochastic gradient descent (SGD) or ascent. SGD proved itself
                                        as an efficient and effective optimization method that was central in many machine learning success
                                        stories, such as recent advances in deep learning (Deng et al., 2013; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Hinton
                                        & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Hinton et al., 2012a; Graves et al., 2013). Objectives may also have other
                                        sources of noise than data subsampling, such as dropout (Hinton et al., 2012b) regularization. For
                                        all such noisy objectives, efficient stochastic optimization techniques are required. The focus of this
                                        paper is on the optimization of stochastic objectives with high-dimensional parameters spaces. In
                                        these cases, higher-order optimization methods are ill-suited, and discussion in this paper will be
                                        restricted to first-order methods.
                                        We propose Adam, a method for efficient stochastic optimization that only requires first-order gra-
                                        dients with little memory requirement. The method computes individual adaptive learning rates for
                                        different parameters from estimates of first and second moments of the gradients; the name Adam
                                        is derived from adaptive moment estimation. Our method is designed to combine the advantages
                                        of two recently popular methods: AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011), which works well with sparse gra-
                                        dients, and RMSProp (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012), which works well in on-line and non-stationary
                                        settings; important connections to these and other stochastic optimization methods are clarified in
                                        section 5. Some of Adam’s advantages are that the magnitudes of parameter updates are invariant to
                                        rescaling of the gradient, its stepsizes are approximately bounded by the stepsize hyperparameter,
                                        it does not require a stationary objective, it works with sparse gradients, and it naturally performs a
                                        form of step size annealing.
                                            ∗
                                                Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by coin flip over a Google Hangout.


                                                                                                1
