Y. Mei et al.                                                                                       Applied Mathematical Modelling 134 (2024) 126–147


while the implicit inverse method required a significantly higher number of iterations, reaching convergence after 4354 iterations.
    In the absence of noise in the datasets, both the explicit and implicit inverse methods exhibited excellent performance in yielding
shear modulus reconstructions, as demonstrated in Fig. 23. However, when 1 % noise was introduced to the datasets, the explicit
inverse method outperformed the implicit inverse method(see Fig. 24). For the explicit inverse method, the average relative error in
the reconstructed shear modulus values was approximately 2 %, indicating a relatively accurate estimation despite the presence of
noise(see Table 5). On the other hand, the implicit inverse method exhibited a higher average error of more than 3 %, signifying a less
precise reconstruction in the presence of noise. Overall, the explicit inverse method proved to be more robust and capable of handling
noisy datasets, leading to more accurate shear modulus reconstructions compared to the implicit inverse method. Furthermore, it is
noteworthy that the reconstructed results maintain good quality even when the noise level is increased to 5 % (see Fig. 25).
    In the case where two inclusions were embedded in the background (as depicted in Fig. 21(b)), As shown in Fig. 26, the results
obtained using the implicit inverse method showed a consistent underestimation of the recovered shear modulus values by at least 20
% as the size of the mapped inclusions increased. Additionally, the shape of the mapped inclusions appeared to become more circular
with the increase of surface displacement datasets. Conversely, when employing the explicit inverse method, the shear modulus values
within the two inclusions were overestimated by approximately 20 %. Furthermore, the shape of the recovered inclusions exhibited a
more circular appearance compared to those predicted by the implicit inverse method. The regularization factors used in Figs. 23–26
are listed in Table 6.
    To assess the robustness of the proposed explicit inverse method, we varied the shape of the inclusion in Sample 1, as depicted in
Fig. 27(a) and (d). Our observations indicate that the reconstructed results obtained from the explicit inverse method effectively
preserve the shape of the complex inclusion, even with only three displacement datasets. In contrast, the implicit inverse method failed
to achieve this level of accuracy.

Discussion

   The paper proposes an explicit inverse approach for characterizing the nonhomogeneous elastic property distribution of three
typical nonlinear biological structures with surface deformation. This approach is different from the prevalent implicit inverse
approach in that it optimizes only the geometric parameters and shear moduli of each region, reducing the scale of the optimization
problem. By doing so, the proposed method improves the uniqueness of the inverse solution since the total number of optimization
variables is reduced. Additionally, the paper highlights an important advantage of the explicit method: it only requires surface
deformation data, which can be measured with high accuracy using low-cost measurement techniques. This makes the proposed
approach more practical and accessible for real-world applications, as it avoids the need for complex and expensive instrumentation to
gather the full-field data.




Fig. 24. The reconstructed results with varying 3,6 and 9 surface displacement datasets corresponding to Sample 1 (1 % noise is introduced into the
measured data, Unit: MPa).

                                                                       143
