Applied Mathematical Modelling 134 (2024) 126–147

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Applied Mathematical Modelling
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/apm

Nondestructively identifying the mechanical behavior of soft
tissues using surface deformation with an explicit
inverse approach
Yue Mei a, b , Dongmei Zhao a, b , Changjiang Xiao a, b , Zhi Sun a, b ,
Weisheng Zhang a, b, * , Xu Guo a, b, *
a

State Key Laboratory of Structural Analysis for Industrial Equipment, Department of Engineering Mechanics, Dalian University of Technology,
Dalian 116023, PR China
b
International Research Center for Computational Mechanics, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116023, PR China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Inverse problem
Layered structures
Inclusion embedded structures
Surface deformation
Biological tissue

Identifying the spatial variation of stiffness properties in soft tissues nondestructively, with
limited surface measurements, poses significant challenges. In this paper, we present a novel
explicit inverse approach designed to characterize the nonhomogeneous elastic property distri­
bution of soft tissues using only surface displacement datasets. In contrast to the prevalent im­
plicit inverse approach, which focuses on optimizing the elastic properties of individual pixels,
our proposed method optimizes the geometric parameters of deformable and movable compo­
nents, as well as shear moduli of each component. As a result, the proposed approach requires far
fewer optimization variables, streamlining the process. Numerical tests conducted in this study
demonstrate the superiority of the explicit inverse method over the implicit inverse method,
providing much-improved reconstructed results. In particular for a ring structure, while the
average relative error of reconstruction using the implicit inverse method can exceed 40 %, the
explicit inverse method achieves a remarkable average relative error of only 5 %. Given that
surface displacements are easily measurable, the integration of our proposed explicit inverse
method with low-cost imaging techniques shows great potential in accurately mapping the elastic
property distribution of biological tissues.

Introduction
Biological tissues often display significant heterogeneity. This diversity is evident in various tissues such as skin [1–3], blood vessels
[4,5], and corneas [6,7], among others, which exhibit multi-layered structures. These layers offer a variety of functionalities, thus
contributing to the complexity of biological systems. Interestingly, the emergence of cancerous tumors introduces an additional level of
heterogeneity to these tissues. These tumors typically exhibit greater stiffness compared to their surrounding healthy tissues due to
pathological alterations [8]. This stark contrast in mechanical properties can serve as a potential indicator of malignancy. It’s also
worth noting that the local mechanical properties of soft tissues are not static; they fluctuate in response to various factors such as age

* Corresponding authors at: State Key Laboratory of Structural Analysis for Industrial Equipment, Department of Engineering Mechanics, Dalian
University of Technology, Dalian 116023, PR China
E-mail addresses: weishengzhang@dlut.edu.cn (W. Zhang), guoxu@dlut.edu.cn (X. Guo).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2024.05.028
Received 10 October 2023; Received in revised form 21 May 2024; Accepted 22 May 2024
Available online 31 May 2024
0307-904X/© 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

