Applied Mathematical Modelling 134 (2024) 126–147

Y. Mei et al.

Fig. 3. The nonhomogeneous shear modulus distribution of an inclusion embedded composite.

Fig. 4. An approximation of Heaviside function.

Reg(μ) =

∫ √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1
2
α
|∇μ| + c2 dΩ
2

(15)

Ω

]
[
For the layered structure, ri = r1i (t1 ), r2i (t2 ), ⋯, rni (tn ) is the geometric parameter vector representing the distance between the i th
] [
[
interface and C0 at the location ti. For the structure with inclusions embedded, the geometric parameter vector ri = r1i , r2i , ⋯, rni = xi0 ,
]
yi0 , di1 , ⋯, din− 2 is consisting of the coordinates of the center and distances between the control points to the center of i th component. In

Eq. (14), the discrepancy between the computed displacement field and measured displacement field on partial surface ∂Ωimeas is
minimized in L-2 norm. The computed displacement field is obtained by solving a forward problem using the finite element method
[32]. Due to the influence of noise in measurements, we introduce a total variation diminishing regularization (TVD) term (the second
term in Eq. (14)), and the specific form is given by Eq. (15). α is the regularization factor which controls the significance of the
regularization on the objective function. c is a small constant to avoid singularities when evaluating the gradient of the regularization
term with respect to optimization variables. It should be noted that there exist alternative forms for the regularization term apart from
the domain integral forms. Nevertheless, we have chosen to adhere to the use of domain integrals due to practical considerations. In
particular, the explicit inverse solver has been developed based on the established framework of the existing implicit inverse solver.
This continuity in methodology ensures consistency and facilitates seamless integration between the two solvers [33]. The specific
value of the regularization factor is chosen based on the smoothness criteria [22].
130

