                     This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
                                               content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LRA.2026.3673907

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED FEBRUARY, 2026                                                                                                          1




              Autonomous Robotic Tissue Palpation and Abnormalities
                                    Characterisation via Ergodic Exploration
             Luca Beber1 , Edoardo Lamon1 , Matteo Saveriano2 , Daniele Fontanelli2 , and Luigi Palopoli1



   Abstract—We propose a novel autonomous robotic palpation                                                 Elasticity Map Ground-Truth Ur3e
framework for real-time elastic mapping during tissue explo-




                                                                                                                                                    Elastic Modulus (kPa)
ration using a viscoelastic tissue model. The method com-
bines force-based parameter estimation using a commercial
force/torque sensor with an ergodic control strategy driven
by a tailored Expected Information Density, which explicitly
biases exploration toward diagnostically relevant regions by
jointly considering model uncertainty, stiffness magnitude, and
spatial gradients. An Extended Kalman Filter is employed to
estimate viscoelastic model parameters online, while Gaussian                                                                                                                   F/T Sensor
Process Regression provides spatial modelling of the estimated
elasticity, and a Heat Equation Driven Area Coverage controller
enables adaptive, continuous trajectory planning. Simulations on
synthetic stiffness maps demonstrate that the proposed approach
achieves better reconstruction accuracy, enhanced segmentation
                                                                                                                                                                            Indenter
capability, and improved robustness in detecting stiff inclusions
compared to Bayesian Optimisation-based techniques. Experi-
mental validation on a silicone phantom with embedded inclu-
sions emulating pathological tissue regions further corroborates
the potential of the method for autonomous tissue characterisa-
tion in diagnostic and screening applications.
                                                                                               Fig. 1. Experimental setup for the proposed ergodic search: (bottom-left)
  Index Terms—Medical Robots and Systems; Sensor-based                                         silicone sample; (top-left) ground-truth elasticity map obtained using a grid-
Control; Force and Tactile Sensing                                                             based approach; (right) the robotic manipulator palpating the silicone sample.


                            I. I NTRODUCTION
                                                                                               with minimal human supervision [4]. To support such needs,
P    ALPATION is a fundamental clinical procedure that
     allows physicians, by touch, to assess tissue stiffness,
texture, and the presence of abnormalities such as tumours
                                                                                               several technologies have emerged. Imaging-based elastogra-
                                                                                               phy methods, e.g., ultrasound [5], magnetic resonance [6], or
                                                                                               laser-based methods [7], estimate tissue stiffness but typically
or swollen lymph nodes [1]. Its speed and non-invasiveness
                                                                                               provide relative measures, are costly or slow, and cannot
make it crucial for early diagnosis, particularly of conditions
                                                                                               be easily integrated into RMIS. Tactile sensing, in contrast,
such as breast cancer. However, palpation is inherently subjec-
                                                                                               offers real-time, quantitative stiffness measurements by cap-
tive and sensitive to inter-practitioner variability, which may
                                                                                               turing force and deformation. Previous works have shown its
compromise diagnostic accuracy and repeatability for small or
                                                                                               potential to reduce applied forces, shorten procedures, and
deep-seated lesions. For this reason, physical examinations are
                                                                                               improve surgical outcomes [8], [9]. Early stiffness mapping
often complemented or replaced by imaging techniques such
                                                                                               used uniform probing grids [10], [11], while later methods
as mammography, the gold standard for early detection [2],
                                                                                               adopted Bayesian Optimisation (BO) to reduce the number of
and ultrasound [3].
                                                                                               probing actions [12]–[14], often coupled with custom tactile
   Accurate assessment of tissue mechanics is equally critical
                                                                                               sensors [8], [9], [15], guided by anatomical priors [16] or with
in robot-assisted minimally invasive surgery (RMIS), where
                                                                                               ad-hoc refined segmentation strategies [15], [17].
robots must adapt to variable stiffness for safe navigation and
manipulation, especially for autonomous systems operating                                         In this work, we propose a method for autonomous robotic
                                                                                               palpation that enables continuous estimation of elastic tissue
  Manuscript received: October, 15, 2025; Revised December, 16, 2025;                          stiffness using a viscoelastic contact model, relying solely
Accepted February, 23, 2026.                                                                   on a commercial force/torque (F/T) sensor. The use of a
  This paper was recommended for publication by Editor Burgner-Kahrs
Jessica upon evaluation of the Associate Editor and Reviewers’ comments.                       viscoelastic model allows more accurate representation of
This research has been funded by the the PNRR project FAIR - Future AI                         tissue dynamics during palpation compared to purely elas-
Research (PE00000013), by the European Union projects INVERSE (GA                              tic formulations, while abnormality characterisation in this
no. 101136067) and MAGICIAN (GA no. 101120731) and by the MUR
Departments of Excellence 2023-27 program (L.232/2016).                                        work focuses on the estimated elastic stiffness. This sensing
  1 Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University
                                                                                               strategy provides a practical alternative to methods based
of Trento, Trento, Italy name.surname@unitn.it                                                 on embedded or specialised sensors, which typically require
  2 , Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Trento, Trento, Italy
name.surname@unitn.org                                                                         customised hardware integration and lack compatibility with
  Digital Object Identifier (DOI): see top of this page.                                       standard robotic platforms. In contrast, the use of an off-the-


                     This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
